This is the directory of programs written in INTERCAL.  It is named
pit because src was already taken---that's where source code for the
compiler lives---and pit seemed an appropriate place to throw
INTERCAL programs anyway.  Most of these are no doubt full of bugs.
Don't complain, you're lucky if anything written in INTERCAL works
at all.

The subdirectory lib contains code fragments that are not complete
programs.

Contents:

from original manual:
  sample.i      Returns absolute value of a 16-bit 2s-complement number
  lib/syslib.i  Standard library

by Jon Blow <blojo@ocf.berkeley.edu>
  sink.i        Simple test program
  random.i      Random number program
  lib/plus.i    Increment .1

by Hans Olsson <f88ho@efd.lth.se>
  lib/1910.doc  Listing of a random number routine.  Hans said he wrote this 
		because he couldn't find (1910) in the system library, but
		it's there in our lib/syslib.i.  We keep this around as an
		example.  (What? Throw away INTERCAL code? Perish the thought!)

by Louis Howell <nazgul@llnl.gov>
  life.i        Conway's game of Life, standard INTERCAL version
  life2.i       This version uses COME FROM and character output
    blinkers
    t_tet
    glider
    gun         Input files for both Life programs
  bubble.i      Bubble sort
  icat.i        Sends input to output
  lib/lib2.i    Currently contains only a decrement routine, see life.doc
  pi.i		Calculate pi
  primes.i	Find prime numbers

The subdirectory tests contains some programs written only to test the
compiler.

by David Moews
  test1.i	prints DO THIS TEST HAS BEEN SUCCESSFULLY COMPLETED
  test2.i	reads in two numbers and multiplies their product

David Moews wrote of the latter (test2.i):

The following program reads in two numbers and then prints their product.
It consists of a trivial calling program followed by a cleaned-up version 
of a portion of the INTERCAL subroutine library.  (Only a portion of 
the INTERCAL subroutine library is present in the posted manual, and 
that portion is full of typos.)

by Jan-Pieter Cornet <cornet@OTech.fgg.EUR.nl>
  iogerunds.i	demonstrate gerund abstention

The programs test16bit.i, testarray.i, testcf.i, testlib2.i,
limits.{i,3i}, testops.{3i,5i}, testsplat.i, were all written by Louis
Howell.  Of these, testcf.i might be considered an interesting
puzzle---try to figure out what it's doing.  The others are pretty
boring, but are included as diagnostics and because so few other
example programs exist.  Not all of these even produce interesting
diagnostic output; it may be necessary to look at the degenerated C
code to determine if the compiler is doing the right thing.


End of file CATALOG
-------------------
